Throttle documentation (#101)
esl/amoc: doc/amoc_throttle.md

## Overview

> Amoc throttle is a module that allows limiting number of users' actions per given interval, no matter how many users there are in a test.

Reviewer: @NelsonVides There's an "Insert a suggestion" feature in the comment editor. This allows you to post a one-click-to-merge diffs for the PR author with exactly the same effort.

It works in both local and distributed environment, allows for dynamic rate changes during a test and exposes metrics which show number of requests and executions.

Amoc throttle allows to set execution `Rate` per `Interval` or limit number of parallel executions when `Interval` is set to `0`.
Each `Rate` is identified with a `Name`.

> Rate limiting mechanism is based on allowing execution in response to a request only when it would not exceed given `Rate`.

Reviewer 2: ... when it does not exceed the given `Rate` ...

> Rate limiting mechanism is based on allowing execution in response to a request only when it would not exceed the given `Rate`.

Author: I think this would change the meaning of the sentence. What I meant was something like this:
"Rate limiting mechanism allows to execute a task in response to a request only when executing this task would not exceed the given `Rate`."
The described behaviour works like this:
1. `amoc_throttle` gets a request from a user. User requests a permission to execute an action.
2. `amoc_throttle` will always respond. The response may be sent after some time (waiting for when an execution would not exceed the `Rate` of those actions) or it may be instantaneous.

If you have any suggestions, I will be glad to hear them, because I'm not sure how to convey this mechanism clearly and it is the main idea behind `amoc_throttle`

Amoc throttle makes sure that given `Rate` per `Interval` is maintained on possibly equal level the whole time.
In other words, it will not create bursts of executions which would also technically result in the same rate in a given interval.
Because of that, it may happen that the actual `Rate` will be little lower then demanded.
It will however never be exceeded. 

## API

Functions provided by Amoc throttle:

- `start(Name, Rate)`, `start(Name, Rate, Interval)`, `start(Name, Rate, Interval, NoOfProcesses)` - functions starting throttle mechanism for a given `Name` with a given `Rate`.
They can also accept `Interval` (default is one minute) and ` NoOfProcesses` (default is 10).

> `Name` is needed to identify the rate as one test can have different rates for different tasks.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`Name` is needed to identify the rate as a single test can have different rates for different tasks.
```

`Interval` is given in milliseconds and can be changed to a different value for convenience or higher granularity.
It also accepts a special value of `0` which limits the number of parallel executions associated with `Name` to `Rate`.

> - `send(Name, Msg)`, `send(Name, Pid, Msg)` - sends a given message `Msg` either to self or a given `Pid` when rate for `Name` allows for that.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `send(Name, Msg)`, `send(Name, Pid, Msg)` - sends a given message `Msg` either to self or a given `Pid` when the rate for `Name` allows for that.
```

May be used to schedule tasks.
- `send_and_wait(Name, Msg)` - sends and receives given message `Msg`.
Can be used to halt execution if we want a process to be idle when waiting for rate increase or other processes finishing their tasks.

> - `run(Name, Fn)` - executes a given function `Fn` when it does not exceed rate for `Name`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `run(Name, Fn)` - executes a given function `Fn` when it does not exceed the rate for `Name`.
```

> `Fn` is executed in a context of a new process spawned on the same node on which process executing `run/2` runs,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`Fn` is executed in a context of a new process spawned on the same node on which the process executing `run/2` runs,
```

so call to `run/2` is non-blocking.
This function is used internally by both `send` functions and `send_and_wait/2`,
so all those actions will be limited to the same rate when called with the same `Name`.
- `pause(Name)` - pauses executions for given `Name` as if `Rate` was set to `0`.
Does not stop scheduled rate changes.

> - `resume(Name)` - resumes executions for given `Name`, so `Rate` and `Interval` are set to the values they are supposed to

Reviewer 4: I'd rather rephrase it as
> [...] so `Rate` and `Interval` are set to the values they were originally supposed to have

or

> [...] so `Rate` and `Interval` are reset to their original values given before the pause

> - `resume(Name)` - resumes executions for given `Name`, so `Rate` and `Interval` are set to the values they are supposed to

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `resume(Name)` - resumes executions for a given `Name`, so the `Rate` and `Interval` are set to the correct values
```

??

Reviewer 2: - `resume(Name)` - resumes the executions for a given `Name`, so the `Rate` and `Interval` are set to the values (which may be different to the ones set before running the `pause/1` function). 
??

(which may be different to the ones set when `pause/1` was run).
- `change_rate(Name, Rate, Interval)` - sets `Rate` and `Interval` for `Name` according to the given values.

> Can change whether Amoc throttle limits `Name` to parallel executions or to `Rate` per `Interval`, according to given `Interval` value.

Reviewer 4: > [...] according to the given `Interval` value.

(article)

- `change_rate_gradually(Name, LowRate, HighRate, RateInterval, StepInterval, NoOfSteps)` - allows to set a plan of gradual rate changes for a given `Name`.

> Rate will be changed from `LowRate` to `HighRate` in series of consecutive steps.

Reviewer 4: > [...] in a series of [...]

(article)

> Rate will be changed from `LowRate` to `HighRate` in series of consecutive steps.

Reviewer 4: Rate at the beginning should be a keyword `Rate`

> `LowRate` does not need to be lower than `HighRate`, rates be changed downwards.

Reviewer 4: > [...] rates can be changed downwards.

Also, if Low and High do not need to be one lower than the other, I'd rather call them `From` and `To` or something like that xD

> `LowRate` does not need to be lower than `HighRate`, rates be changed downwards.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`LowRate` does not need to be lower than `HighRate`, rates can be changed downwards.
```

??

Rate at each step is calculated in relation to `RateInterval`, which can also be `0`.

> Each step will take `StepInterval` time in milliseconds.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Each step will take the `StepInterval` time in milliseconds.
```

There will be `NoOfSteps` steps.

> Be aware that at first rate will be changed to `LowRate` per `RateInterval` and this is not considered a step.

Reviewer 4: > Be aware that, at first, the rate will be [...]

(commas and article)

> - `stop(Name)` - stops throttle mechanism for `Name`

Reviewer 4: > [...] – stops the throttle [...]

(article)

## Examples

> Typical use of Amoc throttle will look something like this:

Reviewer 4: > A typical use of [...]

(article)

```erlang
-module(scenario_with_throttle).

-export([init/0]).
-export([start/1]).

init() ->
    amoc_throttle:start(messages_rate, 100),        %% 100 messages per minute
    %% continue initialization
    ok.

start(Id) ->
    %% initialize user
    user_loop(Id),
    ok.
    
user_loop(Id) ->
    amoc_throttle:send_and_wait(messages_rate, some_message),
    send_message(Id),
    user_loop(Id).

```
Here a system should be under a continuous load of 100 messages per minute.
Note that if we used something like `amoc_throttle:run(messages_rate, fun() -> send_message(Id) end)` instead of `send_and_wait/2` the system would be flooded with requests.

A test may of course be much more complicated.

> For example it can have load changing in time. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For example it can have the load changing in time. 
```

A plan for that can be set up for the whole test in `init()`:
```erlang
init() ->
    %% init metrics
    amoc_throttle:start(messages_rate, 100),
    %% 9 steps of 100 increases in Rate, each lasting one minute
    amoc_throttle:change_rate_gradually(messages_rate, 100, 1000, 60000, 60000, 9),
    ok.

```

> Normal Erlang messages can be used to schedule tasks for users by themselves or some controller process.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Normal Erlang messages can be used to schedule tasks for users by themselves or by some controller process.
```

> Below is a sketch of user's behaviour during a test.

Reviewer 4: > [...] sketch of a user's behaviour [...]

(article)

> It waits for messages in loop, and sends one after receiving message `{send_message, To}`.

Reviewer 4: > [...] messages in a loop, [...]

(article)

> Rate of messages sent during a test will not exceed a previously set one bound to the name `message_rate`.

Reviewer 4: > The rate of [...]

(article)

> Rate of messages sent during a test will not exceed a previously set one bound to the name `message_rate`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Rate of messages sent during a test will not exceed the one set in the `message_rate`.
```

?

> Sending messages is scheduled in `set_up/1` function and in user loop if some arbitrary condition is met.

Reviewer 4: > [...] is scheduled in the `set_up/1` function and in the user loop [...]

(two articles)

> Sending messages is scheduled in `set_up(Users)` function and in user loop if some arbitrary condition is met.

Reviewer 2: I think it is better to use the `set_up/1` syntax in the sentence.

This models the behaviour common across load tests, when users respond only to some messages.
```erlang
set_up(Users) ->
    [User ! {send_message, To} || User <- Users, To <- Users].

user_loop() ->
    receive
        {send_message, To} -> 
            send_xmpp_message(To),
            user_loop();
        Message ->
            process_message(Message),
            user_loop()       
    end.

process_message(Message) ->
    case some_condition(Message) of
        true -> 
            To = get_sender(Message),
            amoc_throttle:send(message_rate, {send_message, To}); 
        false ->
            ok 
    end.

```

> For a more comprehensive example please refer to the `throttle_test` scenario, which shows possible usages of Amoc throttle.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For a more comprehensive example please refer to the `throttle_test` scenario, which shows possible usages of the Amoc throttle.
```

## How it works

### Module overview

- `amoc_throttle.erl` - provides an API for `amoc_throttle_controller`.
- `amoc_throttle_controller.erl` - a gen_server which is responsible for reacting to requests, and managing `throttle_processes`.

> In distributed environment an instance of `throttle_controller` runs on every node, although the one running on master Amoc node is the one keeping the state for all nodes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In a distributed environment an instance of `throttle_controller` runs on every node, and the one running on the master Amoc node keeps the state for all nodes.
```

alt:

```suggestion
In a distributed environment an instance of `throttle_controller` runs on every node, and the one running on the master Amoc node stores the state for all nodes.
```

- `amoc_throttle_process.erl` - gen_server module, implements the logic responsible for limiting rate.

> For every `Name` a `NoOfProcesses` are created, each responsible for keeping executions at a level of proportional part of the `Rate`.

Reviewer 4: Hmmm... tricky one, maybe something like
> For every `Name`, a `NoOfProcesses` processes are created, [...]

because `NoOfProcesses` is technically just an integer, so we need to specify what are we counting, but then it's a bit redundant... I don't know 🤷‍♂

> For every `Name` a `NoOfProcesses` are created, each responsible for keeping executions at a level of proportional part of the `Rate`.

Reviewer 4: > [...] each one responsible for keeping executions at a level proportional to their part of `Rate`

Or something like that... The sentence is quite complex. Perhaps just try to re-explain that (?)

> For every `Name` a `NoOfProcesses` are created, each responsible for keeping executions at a level of proportional part of the `Rate`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For every `Name` a `NoOfProcesses` are created, each responsible for keeping executions at a level of a proportional part of the `Rate`.
```

### Distributed environment

#### Metrics

> In distributed environment every Amoc node with throttle started exposes metrics showing numbers of requests and executions.

Reviewer 4: > In a distributed environment [...] showing the numbers of requests and executions.

(two articles)

> In distributed environment every Amoc node with throttle started exposes metrics showing numbers of requests and executions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In a distributed environment every Amoc node with a throttle started, exposes metrics showing numbers of requests and executions.
```

> Those exposed by master node show the sum of all metrics from all nodes.

Reviewer 4: > [...] by the master node [...]

This allows to quickly see the real rates across the whole system.

#### Workflow

> When user executes `amoc_throttle:run(Name, Fun)` a request is reported to a metric that runs on user's node.

Reviewer 4: > When a user executes [...] that runs on the user's node.

(two articles)

> When user executes `amoc_throttle:run(Name, Fun)` a request is reported to a metric that runs on user's node.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When a user executes `amoc_throttle:run(Name, Fun)`, a request is reported to a metric that runs on the user's node.
```

Then a runner process is spawned on the same node.

> It's task will be to execute `Fun` asynchronously.

Reviewer 4: > Its

`It's` is a contraction of "it is", while `its` is the possessive of "it", like "his" or "her".

> It's task will be to execute `Fun` asynchronously.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Its task will be to execute `Fun` asynchronously.
```

> A random throttle process which is assigned to the `Name` is asked for permission for asynchronous runner to execute `Fun`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A random throttle process which is assigned to the `Name` is asked for a permission for asynchronous runner to execute `Fun`.
```

> When the request reaches the master node, where throttle processes reside, request metric on master node is updated and throttle process which got the request starts monitoring the asynchronous runner process.

Reviewer 4: > [...] reside, the request metric on the master node is updated and the throttle process [...]

(three articles)

> When the request reaches the master node, where throttle processes reside, request metric on master node is updated and throttle process which got the request starts monitoring the asynchronous runner process.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When the request reaches the master node, where throttle processes reside, a request metric on the master node is updated and the throttle process which got the request starts monitoring the asynchronous runner process.
```

> Then, depending on the load on the system and the current rate of executions, the asynchronous runner is allowed to run the `Fun` or it has to wait, because executing the function would exceed the calculated `Rate` in an `Interval`.

Reviewer 4: > Then, depending on the system's load [...]

(reordering for genitive)

Also
> [...] is allowed to run the `Fun` or compelled to wait

For consistency between two connected sentences.

> When the rate finally allows for execution, asynchronous runner gets the permission to run the function from throttle process.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When the rate finally allows it, the asynchronous runner gets the permission to run the function from the throttle process.
```

> When the rate finally allows for execution, asynchronous runner gets the permission to run the function from throttle process.

Reviewer 4: > [...] execution, the asynchronous [...] from the throttle process.

(two articles)

Both processes increase the metrics which count executions, but for each the metric is assigned to their own node.
Then the asynchronous runner tries to execute `Fun`.
It may succeed or fail, either way it dies and an `'EXIT'` signal is sent to the throttle process.

> This way it knows that an execution of a task has ended, and can allow a different process to run it's task connected to the same `Name` if the current `Rate` allows.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This way it knows that the execution of a task has ended, and can allow a different process to run its task connected to the same `Name` if the current `Rate` allows it.
```

> This way it knows that an execution of a task has ended, and can allow a different process to run it's task connected to the same `Name` if the current `Rate` allows.

Reviewer 4: `it's` => `its`, same than before

## Overview

Amoc throttle is a module that allows limiting the number of users' actions per given interval, no matter how many users there are in a test.
It works in both local and distributed environments, allows for dynamic rate changes during a test and exposes metrics which show the number of requests and executions.

Amoc throttle allows setting the execution `Rate` per `Interval` or limiting the number of parallel executions when `Interval` is set to `0`.
Each `Rate` is identified with a `Name`.
The rate limiting mechanism allows responding to a request only when it does not exceed the given `Rate`.
Amoc throttle makes sure that the given `Rate` per `Interval` is maintained on a constant level.
It prevents bursts of executions which could blurry the results, as they technically produce a desired rate in a given interval.
Because of that, it may happen that the actual `Rate` would be slightly below the demanded rate. However, it will never be exceeded.

## API

Functions provided by Amoc throttle:
```

> start(Name :: name(), Rate :: pos_integer()[, Interval :: non_neg_integer(), NoOfProcesses :: pos_integer()) -> ok | {error, any()}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
start(Name, Rate, Interval, NoOfProcesses) -> R when
      Name :: name(),
      Rate :: pos_integer(),
      Interval :: non_neg_integer(),
      NoOfProcesses :: pos_integer(),
      R :: ok | {error, any()}.
```

```
run(Name :: name(), Fn :: fun(()-> any())) -> ok | {error, any()}.
```
Executes a given function `Fn` when it does not exceed the rate for `Name`.
`Fn` is executed in the context of a new process spawned on the same node on which the process executing `run/2` runs, so a call to `run/2` is non-blocking.
This function is used internally by both `send` and `send_and_wait/2` functions,
so all those actions will be limited to the same rate when called with the same `Name`.

```
pause(Name :: name()) -> ok | {error, any()}.
```
Pauses executions for the given `Name` as if `Rate` was set to `0`.
Does not stop the scheduled rate changes.

```
resume(Name :: name()) -> ok | {error, any()}.
```
Resumes the executions for the given `Name`, so the `Rate` and `Interval` are reset to their original values given before the pause.
```
change_rate(name(), pos_integer(), non_neg_integer()) -> ok | {error, any()}.
```
Sets `Rate` and `Interval` for `Name` according to the given values.
Can change whether Amoc throttle limits `Name` to parallel executions or to `Rate` per `Interval`, according to the given `Interval` value.
```

> change_rate_gradually(Name :: name(), From :: pos_integer(), To :: pos_integer(), RateInterval :: non_neg_integer(), StepInterval :: pos_integer(), NoOfSteps :: pos_integer()) -> ok | {error, any()}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
change_rate_gradually(Name, From, To, RateInterval, StepInterval, NoOfSteps)) -> R when
                      Name :: name(),
                      From :: pos_integer(),
                      To :: pos_integer(),
                      RateInterval :: non_neg_integer(),
                      StepInterval :: pos_integer(),
                      NoOfSteps :: pos_integer(),
                      R :: ok | {error, any()}.
```

I think this style is way more readable for specs/signatures this long.
The original line was 199 chars!

Reviewer 2: True 👍

```
Allows to set a plan of gradual rate changes for a given `Name`.
`Rate` will be changed from `From` to `To` in a series of consecutive steps.
`From` does not need to be lower than `To`, rates can be changed downwards.

> The rate is calculated at each step in relation to the`RateInterval`, which can also be `0`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The rate is calculated at each step in relation to the `RateInterval`, which can also be `0`.
```
